YARP 3.6.0 (2021-12-24)                                                {#v3_6_0}
=======================

[TOC]

YARP 3.6.0 Release Notes
========================

A (partial) list of bug fixed and issues resolved in this release can be found
[here](https://github.com/robotology/yarp/issues?q=label%3A%22Fixed+in%3A+YARP+v3.6.0%22).


Important Changes
-----------------

* SWIG 4 or later is now required to build YARP bindings
* CMake 3.16 or later is now required
* A compiler that supports C++17 is now required

### YARP_conf

* The `YARP_VERSION_COMPARE` macro has been added to version.h to simplify how
  YARP versions are compared e.g. in `#if` guards. For instance, the condition
  `#if YARP_VERSION_COMPARE(>=, 3, 6, 0)` will yield true if the current YARP
  version is equal to or greater than 3.6.0.

### `robotinterface`

* Added `--dryrun` option to test the xml file without actually opening devices.
* Added `reverse-shutdown-action-order` attribute for the `robot` tag.
  This reverses the order of actions in shutdown and interrupt phase, making it
  easier to write the actions when multiple attach and detach are involved.
* All `device` tag parameters are now passed to all devices defined inside that tag.
* Added the `YARP_PORTNUMBER<XXX>` environment variable.
  This allows to change the port number on which the corresponding port is
  opened by setting the `YARP_PORTNUMBER<XXX>` environment variable to the desired
  port number of the port.
  For example: `YARP_PORTNUMBER_read=20050 yarp read /read` will open a port named
  `/read` on the `20050` port.
  Port numbers (if present) are applied before prefixes specified with
  `YARP_PORT_PREFIX` and renames specified with `YARP_RENAME` (if present).
  **WARNING**, if the same port is opened with the same name but different port
  number by two processes, this might lead to port stealing by the latest
  process executed.

### GUIs

#### yarpmotorgui

* Modified yarpmotorgui to support a new page "Hardware Fault" which displays the internal hardware error
* Improved slider graphics, with displayed reference value (optional, enabled from the menu, default off)

#### yarplogger

* added option '--unlimited_size' which removes all limits on the log size. To be used with caution!
* fixed some bugs related to how the limits are applied to new logs added to an on-going session
* saving/loading log routines moved YarpLoggerFiles.cpp
* fixed issue related to saving/loading files containing empty strings.
* reduced size of mutex-proteceted critical section in logger_thread::run()
* added a counter which return from the logger_thread::run() every xxx processed events.yarpmotorgui_hwfault        {#v3_6_0}

### extern
* updated `rplidar` sdk

### `harness_dev`
* MapGrid2DTest.cpp refactored
* Navigation2DClientTest.cpp refactored
* Added tests for `Map2DClient -> Map2DServer` communication
* Added tests for `Map2D_nwc_yarp -> Map2D_nws_yarp` communication
* Added tests for `Navigation2DClient -> Navigation2DServer` communication
* Added tests for `Navigation2D_nwc_yarp -> Navigation2D_nws_yarp` communication

### portmonitors

* added new portmonitor `bottle_compression_zlib` to compress bottles (or yarp data types which can be converted to bottle)
* added option `debug_compression_info` to `bottle_compression_zlib` portmonitor
* added new portmonitor `soundfilter_resample` to resample audio streams

### tools

#### `yarp`

* Added option `testdata_filename` to latency-test companion.
  It allows to load a file which will be transmitted over the network as benchmark.
  Different files can be used to test latency when using a compression portmonitor (the compression factor will depend on the entropy of the file )



### Libraries

#### YARP_run

* yarprun now checks the environment variable `YARP_LOG_PROCESS_LABEL`. 
  If found, the label is appended to the executable name in the log port name. e.g. /log/yaprunname/yarpdev[mylabel]/123123

#### YARP_sig
* added new files `yarp::sig::SoundFilters.h`, `yarp::sig::SoundFilters.cpp`
* added new method `yarp::sig::soundfilters::resample()`




#### YARP_os

##### `Log`
* yarp::os::LogStream has learned to chain most standard containers as well as
  arrays and tuples. In addition to the previously supported `std::vector`, it
  is now also possible to call `yInfo() << collection` where the collection is
  a `std::array`, `std::list`, `std::set`, `std::map`, C-array, `std::tuple`...
* Added the new family of logging macros with "Id" (`yIDebug`).
  See [documentation](\ref yarp_logging).
* yarp::os::LogForwarder now checks the environment variable `YARP_LOG_PROCESS_LABEL`. 
  If found, the label is appended to the executable name in the log port name. e.g. /log/hostname/yarpdev[mylabel]/123123



#### YARP_dev

* The documentation of the thrift types: `Map2DAreaData`, `Map2DLocationData`, `Map2DPathData` has been updated.

##### yarp::dev::IJointFault
* Added new interface IJointFault with method: IJointFault::getLastJointFault(int j, int& fault, std::string& message)

##### yarp::dev::Nav2D::INavigation2DVelocityActions
* `applyVelocityCommand()` method moved from `yarp::dev::Nav2D::INavigation2DTargetActions` to
   new interface `yarp::dev::Nav2D::INavigation2DVelocityActions`

##### yarp::dev::Nav2D::MapGrid2D
*  added internal lossless compression for datatype `yarp::dev::Nav2D::MapGrid2D` using Zlib: the methods `yarp::os::Portable::write()`
   and `yarp::os::Portable::read()` handle the compression before sending data to the network.
*  the method `MapGrid2D::enable_map_compression_over_network()` enables/disables the data compression over the network (default true).
*  if Zlib library is not available, compression will be set to false.

##### yarp::dev::Nav2D::Map2DArea
* Map2DArea added new method `Map2DArea::getCentroid()`
* Map2DArea has been refactored: it now inherits from the thrift defined type Map2DAreaData.thrift
* Map2DArea now include a `description` field which can be filled by the user for generic purposes

##### yarp::dev::Nav2D::Map2DLocation
* Map2DLocation now include a `description` field which can be filled by the user for generic purposes

##### yarp::dev::Nav2D::Map2DPath
* Map2DPath now include a `description` field which can be filled by the user for generic purposes

##### yarp::dev::Nav2D::IMap2D
* Added the following three methods:
   getAllLocations(std::vector<yarp::dev::Nav2D::Map2DLocation>& locations)
   getAllAreas(std::vector<yarp::dev::Nav2D::Map2DArea>& areas)
   getAllPaths(std::vector<yarp::dev::Nav2D::Map2DPath>& paths)

##### yarp::dev::Nav2D::IOdometry2D
* Added the new interface `yarp::dev::Nav2D::IOdometry2D`

##### yarp::dev::Nav2D::INavigation2D
* `INavigation2D` interface now derives from `IMap2D` interface

##### `DeviceDriver`
* Added `id()` and `setId()` methods

##### `PolyDriver`
* The device id can be set passing the `id` option to the `open` method (or passing `--id` to `yarpdev`).




### devices
* Most of the clients/nwcs now implement the option `carrier` to set the carrier for the connection with the server

#### fakeLaser
* device extended to connect to `localization2D_nwc_yarp` instead of `localization2DClient`

#### frameTransformServer/frameTransformClient
*  Added the option to use an extern xml file (by providing its absolute path) to configure the `frameTransformServer` and the `frameTransformClient` devices.

#### localization2D_nwc_yarp
*  Added new device `localization2D_nwc_yarp` which connects to `localization2D_nws_yarp` via thrift `ILocalization2DMsgs`
   
#### localization2DClient
*  Added a warning to device `localization2DClient`. The device will be deprecated in the next release. 

#### map2D_nwc_yarp
*   Added new device `map2D_nwc_yarp` which connects to `map2D_nws_yarp` via thrift `IMap2DMsgs`.

#### map2DClient
*  Added a warning to device `map2DClient`. The device will be deprecated in the next release. 

#### map2DStorage
*  Updated `map2DStorage` device to support the new `v3` file format, which includes the description for `Map2DLocation`, `Map2DArea` and `Map2DPath`

#### map2DServer
*   added rpc option `enable_maps_compression <0/1>`

#### MobileBaseVelocityControl_nwc_yarp
* added new device: `MobileBaseVelocityControl_nwc_yarp`

#### MobileBaseVelocityControl_nws_yarp
* added new device: `MobileBaseVelocityControl_nws_yarp`

#### MobileBaseVelocityControl_nws_ros
* added new device: `MobileBaseVelocityControl_nws_ros`

#### fakeOdometry
* added new device `fakeOdometry` that generates a fake odometry and makes it available from `IOdometry2D` interface.

#### odometry2D_nws_yarp
* Added new device `odometry2D_nws_yarp` which can be attached to a `IOdometry2D` interface and publish the data on yarp ports:

#### odometry2D_nws_ros
* Added new device `odometry2D_nws_ros` which can be attached to a `IOdometry2D` interface and publish the data on a ros topic.

#### rpLidar3
* added new device `rpLidar3`

#### RemoteControlBoard
* RemoteControlBoard now implements `IJointFault`

#### ControlBoard_nws_yarp
* ControlBoard_nws_yarp now implements `IJointFault`

#### ControlBoardRemapper
* ControlBoardRemapper now implements `IJointFault`

#### fakeMotionControl
* `fakeMotionControl` now simulates an hardware fault when it receives a TorqueCommand > 1Nm

#### `MobileBaseVelocityControl_nws_yarp`
* Added input streaming port as an alternative to rpc command `applyVelocityCommandRPC()`
* Added `subdevice` option.

#### `MobileBaseVelocityControl_nws_ros`
* Removed periodic thread in favor of callback.
* Added `subdevice` option.

#### `portaudio*`,
* 'id' parameter was renamed to 'dev_id'.

#### navigation2D_nwc_yarp
*  Added new device `navigation2D_nwc_yarp`.
* The device connects to following devices using thrift:
   * `map2D_nws_yarp`
   * `localization2D_nws_yarp`
   * `navigation2D_nws_yarp`

#### navigation2DServer
* added deprecation warning to `navigation2DServer`

#### navigation2D_nws_yarp
* Added new device `navigation2D_nws_yarp`
* The device uses the new thrift interface `INavigation2DMsgs`

#### Navigation2DClient
* `Navigation2DClient` source code has been split into multiple files, one for each yarp interface.
*  The device connects to the following devices without using thrift:
   * `map2DServer`
   * `localization2DServer`
   * `navigation2DServer`

Contributors
------------

This is a list of people that contributed to this release (generated from the
git history using `git shortlog -ens --no-merges v3.5.0..v3.6.0`):

```
   147	Daniele E. Domenichelli <daniele.domenichelli@iit.it>
   104	Marco Randazzo <marco.randazzo@iit.it>
    23	Ettore Landini <ettore.landini@iit.it>
     6	Bartek Łukawski <bwmn.peter@gmail.com>
     6	Diego Ferigo <diego.ferigo@iit.it>
     5	Stefano Bernagozzi <stefano.bernagozzi@iit.it>
     1	Marco Randazzo <marco.randaz@iit.it>
     1	Silvio Traversaro <silvio.traversaro@iit.it>
     1	Ugo Pattacini <ugo.pattacini@iit.it>
```
